Area: Program and ServicesPolicy:  12 VAC 40-151-750Pages: 1 of 3DocumentationIssued:  October 7, 2013    Revised
Policy:

Youth For Tomorrow staff will document both positive and negative behaviors of residents daily, weekly and when minor and major incidents occur which require a Behavior Report (BR) or Serious Incident Report (SIR) to be written.  

NOTE:  Staff will not document behaviors in email.  Concerns regarding behaviors should only be documented in the categories described below.  Also, do not use email to notify supervisors, nursing staff, other staff or clinicians of behavior concerns.  If there are behavior concerns requiring immediate attention or notification, notify the supervisor via telephone and document concerns and notifications in a behavior report or in some cases a Serious Incident Report.

Procedures:

There are four (4) levels of documenting a resident?s behavior at Youth For Tomorrow.  

Level 1:  Daily notes
Level 1 includes the daily documentation of a resident or residents? actions and behaviors in the home or when school is in session. There are three daily records:
? ?	Movement Logs (residential only)
? ?	Shift Change Report (residential only)
? ?	Class Notes (education only)
1. 1.	Movement Logs. All residential homes will keep a movement log recording specific detailed behaviors of residents every 30 minutes.
2. 2.	Shift Change Report.  All residential staff will complete a shift change report at the end of their shift which includes a summary of each individual resident?s behavior in the home and a group summary of the overall interactions of the residents in the home.  When documenting the shift change, the note should consist of a general overview of residents? day. Notes should include residents? behavior, activities, and any disciplinary actions for the day. 

The shift change report will also include, but not limited to, the following: 
a. a)	If a resident behavior warranted a Behavioral Report (BR) or Serious Incident Report (SIR).
b. b)	If the Director on Call has been notified and why.
c. c)	If the police or emergency responders have been notified and why.
d. d)	If a safety plan is in place in the home and the resident or residents progress in following the safety plan.
e. 3.	Class Notes.  All education staff will complete individual class notes on each resident at the end of the class period or school day, summarizing both positive and negative behaviors.  



Level 2:  Weekly notes:

Level 2 includes the weekly summary of a resident?s behavior in residential, counseling, education and Evaluation Team (ET).  There are four types of summaries completed each week: 
a. ?	ET ? Education
b. ?	ET ? Residential
c. ?	ET ? Counseling
d. ?	ET Summary
The first three notes are completed by designated individuals in each YFT component summarizing the behaviors on each individual resident.  These notes are used as a focus of discussion during Evaluation Team (ET).  Follow ET, the resident?s case manager provides a combined summary of the component notes and outcomes of the discussion during ET, noting interventions to assist a resident in meeting ISP goals and changing behaviors; and the resident?s progress in the YFT phase system. 

Level 3:  Behavior Reports (BR):
A Behavior Report (BR) is a report to offer information about minor behavior violations that warrant further explanation or disciplinary action which, if left unaddressed, may pose a safety or mental health concern. The following examples show when a BR should be written: 
a. 1.	Possession of money/currency without permission;
b. 2.	Loaning, trading or borrowing; 
c. 3.	Smoking or suspected smoking; 
d. 4.	Habitual use of inappropriate language;
e. 5.	Habitual refusal to comply with staff request; 
f. 6.	Enters a room/hallway other than his/her without permission at any time; 
g. 7.	Habitual dress code violations;
h. 8.	Habitual tardiness to school or groups; 
i. 9.	Possession of electronic device or telephone without permission;
j. 10.	Unexcused absence from school;
k. 11.	Verbally aggressive towards staff or peers;
l. 12.	Out of staff supervision; and, 
m. 13.	Disclosure of significant information which is concerning staff and/or may result in behavior concerns (i.e., arguments with family members, death in the family, etc.). 

Level 4:  Serious Incident Report (SIR):
According to 12VAC35-46-1070,  a ?serious incidents" include accidents or injuries to the resident requiring medical attention other than minor first aid, unauthorized absences from the facility, allegations of child abuse or neglect, serious infractions of facility or school rules, suspected drug abuse, accusations of criminal conduct, serious illnesses, serious altercations with staff or other residents, or any other event or incident involving the resident which may reasonably impact on the rights and responsibilities of the resident's legal guardian. 

A Serious Incident Report (SIR) is a major violation of agency rules or defined by a Comprehensive Services Act (CSA) contract from placing agency.  A documentation of displayed behaviors.  When a SIR involves allegations of child abuse and neglect, a Child Abuse and Neglect form must also be completed and submitted to members of the Leadership Team via email. The following examples show when a SIR should be written: 
a. 1.	Accidents or injuries to resident requiring medical attention other than minor first aid;
b. 2.	Unauthorized absence from YFT campus or program for more than 45 minutes (AWOL);
c. 3.	Out of staff supervision for more than 45 minutes;
d. 4.	Allegations of child abuse or neglect; 
e. 5.	Serious Infractions of residential or school rules;
f. 6.	Event or incident involving the resident which may reasonably impact the rights and responsibilities of resident?s legal guardian;
g. 7.	Testing positive or possession of an illegal substance; 
h. 8.	Observed smoking  or in possession of tobacco products (under 16); 
i. 9.	Providing tobacco products to a resident under the age of 16;
j. 10.	Accusations of or confirmed criminal conduct;
k. 11.	Physically assaulting staff or peer:  
l. 12.	Calling the police or emergency responders to campus; 
m. 13.	Participating in a sex act with another resident; and, 
n. 14.	Other serious incidents as defined by the Comprehensive Services Act (CSA) contract from placing agency.

All reports should reflect similar if not more detailed information depending upon the level.  Level 1 should note minor and major incidents in summary, whereas Level 3 and Level 4 should provide more detailed information.  On any given day, staff should not read a shift change report which reflects cooperative behaviors, then find out later there were several minor or major incidents in the home.  

Staff must follow the rules and regulations which govern Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Rules.  No information regarding a resident?s medical or mental health should be distributed via email.  This information should be provided to the case manager and nursing staff in written format such as a Behavior Report (or when warranted a SIR) and placed in the resident?s record.  

Child Abuse and Neglect Allegations should be reported: 
a. 1.	During business hours,ÿMonday-Friday fromÿ8 a.m. - 5 p.m.,ÿcallÿchild Protective Services atÿ703-792-4200.
b. 2.	After business hours (5 p.m. toÿ8 a.m.)ÿand on the weekends,ÿcall the Prince William County Police non-emergency numberÿat 703-792-6500; orÿthe Virginia State Hotline at 1-800-552-7096.ÿ 
c. 3.	The date and time of the call, the name of the person to whom the incident was reported, and a reference number, if available, should be documented immediately. 

Also call contact the YFT Director on Call who will notify the Office of Human Rights at 540-332-8321 877-600-7437.


