Behavior Management

Area:  Behavior ManagementPolicy: 12 VAC 35-46-940Pages: 1 of 6Behavior InterventionsIssued:  October 7, 2013     Revised: May 25, 2017  
Policy:

[Agency] staff will be trained to provide behavior management techniques within all component area in support of residents. Staff is responsible for monitoring and documenting the management of resident behavior and assisting residents in learning ways to manage their own behavior.

Behavior support means those principles and methods employed to help a resident achieve positive behavior and to address and correct a resident?s inappropriate behavior in a constructive and safe manner, in accordance with written policies and procedures governing program expectations, treatment goals, resident and staff safety and security, the resident?s service plan, and Individualized Education Plan (IEP), if applicable

[Agency]?s philosophy toward discipline is based on responsibility and accountability. Generally, discipline is corrective action to assist a resident with engaging in constructive, successful behaviors.  Discipline includes the application of teaching instruction with consequences, both positive and negative, for behavior. Discipline for inappropriate behavior will be administered in a firm, fair, and impartial manner.  An attitude of concern and respect towards the resident will be maintained at all times with a clear distinction made between the individual and the inappropriate behavior of that individual.

Procedures:
1. Written information concerning the policies and procedures of the provider's behavioral support and intervention programs (Resident/Parent Handbook) will be provided prior to admission to prospective residents, legal guardians, and placing agencies. For court-ordered and emergency admissions, this information shall be provided to: a) residents within 12 hours following admission; b) placing agencies within 72 hours following the resident's admission; and c) legal guardians within 72 hours following the resident's admission.
2.	When substantive revisions are made to the policies and procedures governing management of resident behavior, written information concerning the revisions will be provided to: a) residents prior to implementation; and b) legal guardians and placing agencies prior to implementation as provided by the Code of Virginia. 

Behavior Management Techniques:
1.  Only staff train in behavior management techniques should utilize them into [Agency]?s system of care.
2. The goal of each behavior management technique described below, should be utilize with the purpose of de-escalating crisis and preventing physical interventions.  
3. When challenging behaviors take place, [Agency]  staff will:
a) Examine the environment within which the behavior occurred;
b) Identify the variables which may have triggered the behavior;
c) Identify appropriate consequences that follow the behavior;
d) Provide support to residents in changing troubling behaviors; and,
e) Instruct residents in the appropriate strategies for managing/eliminating these behaviors when recurrent.
4. [Agency] staff should make every attempt to encourage residents to comply with the rules and regulations provided during intake.  In addition, in order to successfully assist residents in managing and supporting their behavior it is important that [Agency] staff participate in and contribute to: 
a) Assessing resident behaviors;
b) Monitoring resident behaviors;
c) Assisting residents in learning and using behavior management strategies; 
d) Using appropriate behavior management techniques; and 
e) Following the [Agency] and/or school discipline policy and procedures.
5. The following is a list of progressive interventions to be utilized to attempt to modify the inappropriate behavior of residents:
a) Ask the misbehaving resident to identify the problem and help him/her clarify the situation.
b) Ask the resident to restate the guideline or expectation. Accept no reasons or excuses for breaking the guidelines (except in real emergencies or extenuating circumstances).
c) Ask the resident for his/her plan to correct the problem and have the resident identify the constructive alternatives to be used in the future. If the resident is unable to express a plan, help him/her to form one.
d) Follow up and hold the resident accountable for his/her plan.
e) Hold an Impromptu Group with other residents to assist resident in de-escalating his/her negative behavior.
f) Write a Serious Incident Report (SIR) or Behavior Report (BR) and include learning activities/projects as a consequence for inappropriate behavior.
g) If all other interventions are unsuccessful, resident is removed from the situation and from other residents.
h) If necessary, Handle With Care (HWC) de-escalation techniques or physical restraint may be utilized.  Prior to using these more restrictive forms of behavior management, techniques learned in Handle with Care (HWC) should be attempted first.

Behavior and/or Safety Plans:
6. When a resident is identified as critical due to extreme, habitual behaviors, school personnel or Case Management staff can request a separate meeting to discuss developing a behavior and/or safety plan.  
7. Case Management staff will begin the process with a functional behavioral analysis, identifying the function of the behavior through interviews with teacher/parents and observations of the resident in the school setting.  
8. This plan will include interventions and strategies for addressing behaviors.  The residents will be invited to this meeting to provide feedback and input into the plan. 
9. The Case Management will take the lead for developing the plan and integrating the resident?s and staff?s input. 
10. Once plans are developed, implemented and distributed, they will be reviewed weekly in Evaluation Team access the plans effectiveness. During the review process the plan will be revised as needed. 
11. Once the plan accomplishes its desired outcome, it will be terminated. 
12. Staff must follow through on the staff s? action steps for the plans to be effective.

Crisis Intervention:
13. All [Agency] staff are trained in the crisis intervention model, Handle With Care (HWC), which provides staff strategies for preventing and intervening in crisis situation.  
14. [Agency] staff will contact emergency responders to assist in clinical emergencies, which refers to either a medical or psychiatric emergency.
15. Only [Agency] employee and contactors trained in Handle With Care will respond to resident crisis using first, verbal intervention, and if necessary (danger to self and others) physical interventions.  
16. Staff should define a crisis according to the definition outlined in the Handle With Care model.  All staff at the time of training will be provided a Handle with Care manual. 
17. [Agency] staff will utilize the Serious Incident Report and / Physical Restraint Form to document the provision of crisis intervention and clinical emergency services. Documentation will include the following:
a) Date and time;
b) Nature of crisis or emergency;
c) Name of individual;
d) Precipitating factors;
e) Interventions/treatment provided;
f) Employees or contractors involved; and

Serious Incident Report and / Physical Restraint Form will be completed and saved in FAMCARE

18. Reasons for writing Serious Incident Reports*
a) Accidents or injuries to the resident requiring medical attention other than minor first aid; 
b) Unauthorized absence from [Agency] campus or program (AWOL).
c) Allegations of child abuse or neglect.
d) Serious infractions of residential or school rules.
e) Event or incident involving the resident which may reasonably impact on the rights and responsibilities of the resident?s legal guardian;
f) Suspected drug use (excluding suspected smoking of cigarettes).
g) Accusations of or confirmed criminal conduct; 
h) Serious illnesses;
i) Serious altercations with staff or other residents; and
j) Other serious incident as defined by a Comprehensive Services Act (CSA) contract from placing agency.
19. According to DBHDS standard 12VAC35-46-1070.A,  a ?serious incidents" include accidents or injuries to the resident requiring medical attention other than minor first aid, unauthorized absences from the facility, allegations of child abuse or neglect, serious infractions of facility or school rules, suspected drug abuse, accusations of criminal conduct, serious illnesses, serious altercations with staff or other residents, or any other event or incident involving the resident which may reasonably impact on the rights and responsibilities of the resident's legal guardian.
20. All SIRS identified as the following:  abuse allegation; compliant case, serious injury case; death case; serious injury will be reported to DBHDS and Computerized Human Rights Information System (CHRIS) by the [Agency] Director on Call or the [Agency] Vice President of Programs.  
21. Before the end of the shift when an incident occurs, the staff that writes the SIR or Physical Restrain Form will save it in FAMCARE.  
22. Reporting staff will notify appropriate parties (guardian, placing worker, parent, P.O., etc.) and document such (time, date, person called, etc.).  If a voicemail message was left, document such on the SIR
23. If a crisis or clinical emergency involves a resident who is admitted into service, the crisis intervention documentation will become part of his record.  
24. Any staff member who fails to follow these procedures will be subject to progressive disciplinary procedures with the first time resulting in a verbal warning.

Restraints:
25. A Physical restraint, also referred to as manual hold, is defined as a physical intervention or hands-on hold to prevent an individual from moving his body when that individual's behavior places him or others at imminent risk.  In addition, the areas discussed above, physical restraint is used judiciously and only when, in the judgment of a reasonable and informed person, the resident's behavior would likely result in harm to the resident or others. 
26. [Agency] staff initiating a restraint will be required to complete the Restraint Form within 24 hours of the incident albeit, preferably immediately following the incident.  
27. The supervisor or a component director will required to review the report within 24 hours of the incident.  
28. If the physical restraint, less intrusive interventions, or measures permitted by DBHDS prove to be unsuccessful in calming and moderating the resident's behavior or if the resident is requiring multiple restraints within a 7 day period, [Agency] will develop an action plan to be followed in the event the interventions normally used are unsuccessful. Factors considered in developing the action plan will include: the population served, the level of residents' disabilities, and access to external services. The plan may include immediate discharge and/or recommendation for an alternative setting.  
29. Following a restraint, [Agency] physical restraint training staff will review and evaluate for continued staff development for performance improvement. 
30. Use of physical restraint will be limited to that which is minimally necessary to protect the resident or others. 
31. Trained staff members may physically restrain a resident only after less restrictive interventions. 
32. Only trained staff members may manage resident behavior. Trained staff members includes only individuals who have been trained in [Agency]'s policies, procedures, and techniques for managing/supporting resident behavior. 
33. Following a restraint and after the resident who was restrained is calm, the [Agency] staff will discuss with the resident the following:  1) what behaviors led to the restraint; and, 2) what could the resident do next time to avoid similar incidents.
34. No untrained [Agency] staff, resident, volunteer, or non-staff member will be asked to assist in a restraint.  
35. [Agency] staff conducting the restrained will document the incident and include: 
a) Date of the restraint;
b) Time of the restraint; 
c) Staff involved in the incidents and a description of their involvement; 
d) Justification for the restraint; 
e) Less restrictive interventions that were unsuccessfully attempted prior to using physical restraint; 
f) Duration of the restraint; 
g) Description of method or methods of physical restraint techniques used; 
h) Signature of the person completing the report and date; and 
i) Reviewer's signature and date. 
36. [Agency] will ensure that restraint may only be implemented, monitored, and discontinued by staff who have been trained in the proper and safe use of restraint, including hands-on techniques. 
37. [Agency] will review [Agency]'s behavior intervention techniques and policies and procedures at least annually to determine appropriateness for the population served. 
38. Any time children are present staff will be present who have completed all trainings in behavior intervention. 

Documenting and Monitoring:
39. To assist residents in making these adjustments, individualized goals and objectives are established and tailored to each resident.  In addition, these goals and objectives are monitored daily, monthly and quarterly. 
a) Daily Monitoring.  [Agency] staff will document a daily log of residents? progress by entering both positive and negative behavior notes in Education Edge (EE) for each resident.  Staff also will document significant happenings or problems experienced by residents. After this information is entered in EE, it can be reviewed and/or printed on student behavior & suspension reports. 
b) Monthly Progress Reports. Case Managers will provide written monthly progress reports to placing agencies and the resident?s legal representative/guardian. Report content will include the resident?s progress towards ISP goals. 
c) Progress Reports.  Quarterly progress reports are developed within 60 days of the initial individual service plan and within each 90-day period thereafter and revised as necessary.  Each progress review meeting addresses the resident?s toward meeting the plan?s objectives; family involvement; continuing needs of the resident; resident?s progress towards discharge; and status of discharge planning. Participants will include the resident, a representative from the school, parents, and other representatives (e.g., educational institutions, guardians, foster care parents, etc.).  This meeting is convened and facilitated by [Agency] Case Management staff.  
40. Critical Issues, Concerns or Commendations will include the following: 
a) Resident is making minimal progress addressing Individual Service Plan (ISP) Goals;
b) Resident is experiencing major issues adjusting to the [Agency]  program;
c) Resident is having major difficulties following [Agency]?s safety rules, expectations and/or routines within The [Agency] residential program;
d) Resident is having major behavioral and/or educational issues in school resulting in behavior or safety plan; 
e) Resident is functioning well (following [Agency]?s safety rules, expectations, and/or  routines), however he/she is not fully invested in the program.



