
HANDLE WITH CARE
Behavior Management System?





INSTRUCTOR MANUAL











? HANDLE WITH CARE?, 1984, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2012. All r.ights reserved.
None of the contents of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written permission of H.W.C.


Property of:
Handle With Care Behavior Management System, Inc. 184 McKinstry Road, Suite A Gardiner, NY 12525
(845) 255-4031 ? Email: HWCBruce@aol.com ? Web Site: www.handlewithcare.com Illustrations by Eric Bakke, Philadelphia, PA

TRAINING SERVICES AND LICENSING CONTRACT
BY RECEIVING, CONTRACTING FOR OR PARTICIPATING IN A HANDLE WITH CARE TRAINING AND/OR BY RECEVING, OR VIEWING HANDLE WITH CARE MATERIALS ALL PARTICIPANTS AND AGENCIES AGREE TO THE FOLLOWING TERMS


OWNERSHIP OF PROGRAM AND TRAINING.
 All property rights (including, but not limited to, the written manual, video, and performance of the verbal and physical components, techniques, team strategies, teaching methods, presentation methods and exercises, demonstrations, performances, workshops and seminars) in the manual and training program provided are owned by Handle With Care and are protected by United States Contract, Copyright, Trademark and Patent laws (International Rights Reserved), other applicable property laws, state and common laws and international treaty provisions. Handle With Care retains all rights not expressly granted. Nothing in this agreement shall grant to Agency or employee any rights, title or ownership interests in or to the Program, Training, Performance or Materials. Agency/Employee shall not remove, alter or otherwise obstruct any copyright notice, trademark notice, patent notice or other proprietary right notice placed on the Program, Program Materials or Training. You may not copy or train HWC's proprietaiy materials, software, training or programming, except as provided in this agreement (collectively "HWC Materials"). Any copies that you are permitted to make pursuant to this agreement are subject to this agreement and must contain the same copyright and other proprietary notices.


LEVELS OF CERTIFICATION.
There are three levels of certification that Handle With Care g,

 A Basic certification means that the student has mastered the t1 certification means that the student has mastered the enough to

A Master certification means that the student has mastered the 1
none of its employees has been granted Master certification anc

An Instructor certification means that the student and agency he Basic Program only to persons directly employed by the Agenc_ has permission to use Handle With Care's program within the I

Handle With Care hereby grants the Agency permission to use, students and the Instructor Manual and video for "Instructors" f training/certification. These materials may only be distributed t<

1(?26'\tJ	\::>
r\ o-\	on
(Y'	Q\00?'e\	and
b	,,W"\	.	e
C e \ \ t\cct\G

Handle With Care materials, including the manuals, video, train mg must be kept under the cover page provided by Handle With Care that contains notice of copyright and trademark. All Handle With Care materials must be kept or maintained separate and distinct from all other materials, training or programs. The Participants' Manual may be copied one (I) for each "Basic" participant whereas the Instructors' Manual may be copied one (I) for each Handle With Care Certified Instructor. This provision supersedes any other contractual term or agreement written, implied or oral.

MISAPPROPRIA TlON.
The party receiving the Handle With Care program and training acknowledges that the Program and Training contain proprietary information developed and owned by Handle With Care and agrees to treat the program as such. Trainee also agrees that he/she will not directly, indirectly or through use of a third party hire, solicit, entice, induce, recruit or employ or associate with, engage or interfere in any of Handle With Care's business, and that Employee/Agency will take all reasonable steps to prevent all parties under its control from using, copying, altering, incorporating, modifying, marketing, capitalizing, defaming, re-selling, lending, leasing, renting, assigning or distributing the program, goodwill and training other than as expressly authorized by this agreement (including but not limited to reverse engineering or taking components of the program and marketing them under a different name or title). Agency shall promptly notify Handle With Care of any known unauthorized use and agrees to reasonably cooperate with Handle With Care in any litigation including litigation brought by Program Owner against third parties reasonably necessary to protect its Program, Training, Performance, related property rights and confidential information.

The agency/licensee may not sub-license, sell, lend, rent, transfer, assign or lease any portion ofHWC's Materials (including any former versions) of the license granted under this agreement. If the licensee is not a natural person, but is a corporation, limited liability company partnership or other legal entity, the licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that all of its employees comply with the terms and conditions of this agreement.

CHOICE OF LAW
Unless otherwise agreed to in writing, this agreement is governed by the laws of the United States, specifically New York law and venued in Ulster County, New York

TRAINING,CERTIFICATION ANO RECERTIFICATION.
Instructor Certification is valid for one year from date of training. Instructors are decertified at the end of one year, unless extension is granted in advance by Handle With Care in anticipation of a scheduled recertification program.Annual training in HWC's basic program is mandated for agencies that only contract for HWC basic training in order to maintain the license to continue using HWC's program. Annual recertification of trainers is required for an agency and trainer to maintain their certification and license to teach and use HWC's program within the
Agency. Agencies who are not current in their training or certification that do not have or have not requested an extension, will be responsible for discontinuing the use of HWC's program and materials and will have to certify that HWC's materials have been collected and are not being used or copied, and that HWC's program is no longer being
used or taught at the Agency. Expert cowt testimony will only be provided to those agencies that are current on their training and licensing requirements.

TERMINATION.
By contracting for Handle With Care training, the Trainee Agency acknowledges agreement to the terms and conditions in th is contract.

Upon the termination of any employee's employment with the licensee, the licensee shall ensure that the employee returns to the licensee all copies ofHWC's Materials (in whatever form i.e. written, audio visual or electronic) in his/her possession.

The license granted under this agreement will terminate automatically if you violate any part of the agreement. In the event of such termination, all copies ofHWC's Materials must be destroyed or immediately returned to HWC, at HWC's option.

If the Trainee Agency needs to cancel already-scheduled dates, 30-day notice is required of this rescheduling or written consent by Handle With Care. Handle With Care retains the right to prematurely terminate this one year license agreement upon any material breach of this contract that agency fails to remedy within 30 days of receiving notice of such breech.

PAYMENT.
The agency agrees to supply any information needed to process payment when training dates are confirmed. Unless specified prior to delivery of service, payment is expected 15 days from the time training is delivered

These terms are incorporated by reference into every seminar registration form and HWC Waiver. By attending or receiving access to HWC's training and materials, every agency, instructor and pa,ticipant agrees to the following terms. This is a one-year limited use non-exclusive, not-for-resale license and services agreement and not a contractof sale.

HANDLE WITH CARE
Behavior Management System, Inc.?
Fax Order Form to 845-256-0094

DATE:

BILL TO:
SHIP TO:

CHECK IF SAME AS BILL TO ADDRESS
ORGANIZATION:
NAME:
CONTACT:
EMAIL:
ADDRESS:
ADDRESS:
PHONE:
FAX:


#

ITEM
s

M

L

XL
COST S-XL

XXL

3XL

4XL
 COST 2XL-4XL
TOTAL COST
1
T-SHIRT
White w/lnstructor




$15.00



$]8.00


Black w/lnstructor






















2
LONG SLEEVE T-SHIRT
White w/lnstructor




$20.00



$22.00


Black w/lnstructor






















WE CAN SPECIAL ORDER APPAREL AND PRODUCT
*We do not keep an extensive inventory of sweatshirts and your order and may take up to 6-8 weeks to ship

COST


SHIPPING $5/SHIRT
(For orders under 5 shirts. For larger orders call for a quote or go onto our web site: www.handlewithcare.com. HWC's shopping cart automatically calculates shipping costs.)



NEW YORK AGENCIES ADD SALES TAX 8.5%



TOTAL







184 McKinstry Road, Gardiner, NY 12525
(845) 255-4031 ? Email: HWCBruce@aol.com ? WebSite: www.handlewithcare.com

HANDLE WITH CARE Order Form for Fax
Fax 845-256-0094 ? Mail: 184 McKinstry Road, Gardiner, NY 12525


DATE:

BILL TO:
SHIP TO:

D CHECK IF SAME AS BILL TO ADDRESS
ORGANIZATION:
NAME:
CONTACT:
EMAIL:
ADDRESS:
ADDRESS:
PHONE:
FAX:




ITEM

QTY

Price Per Unit

Item Total
(Qty x Price)
PRT Tripod Stand IIVI


$75.00

CerviPro SpitGuard?


$175.00


Standard Shipping & Handling Charges.
Use the shipping estimates below or go on our web site: www.handlewithcare.com. HWC's shopping cart automatically calculates shipping costs.
Subtotal


Sales Tax*

If the subtotal is
$75 to
$175
$176 to
$375
$376 to
$875
$876 and over
Shipping & Handling

Add this for
shipping
$15
$20
$30
Call for Quote
GrandTotal


NYC residents add 8.25% for all other NY counties and locations, please add your appropriate sales tax rate. If tax exempt, enter exempt/resale number:	?



Tel: (845) 255-4031þ Email: HWCBruce@aol.com ? WebSite: www.handlewithcare.com

Handle With Care Instructor Manual
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction: The Handle With Care Story Module 1: The Handle With Care Philosophy Module 2: The Tension /Tension Reduction Cycle
Module 3: Using the Therapeutic Relationship to Reduce Tension Module 4: Non Verbal And Verbal Intervention Techniques Module 5: Your Agency's Use Of Force Policy
Module 6A: Personal Defense - Escape Techniques Module 68: Personal Defense - Blocking Techniques Module 7: Primary Restraint Technique and Take Down Module 8: Personal Defense Interface
Module 9: Two Person Escort Method and Takedown

Module 98: The HWC Two Person Supine

Module 10: Four Person Team Restraint and Deployment

Module 11: De-Escalation / Letting Go Process and Life Space Interview Specialized Techniques Speed Cuffing, Breaking Up Fights
Loose and Scrambling (Controlling an individual in an open space)

Addendum: HWC Early Childhood Program: Pre-School and Early Elementary School

The Handle With Care Story
In May, 1973, just before my 21st birthday, I applied for a Psych Tech position on
"8 Spruce", the 18 bed psychiatric intensive care unit at historic Pennsylvania Hospital. The unit served as the inpatient component to Hall Mercer, one of the first mental health centers established under the 1966 Community Mental Health Act. I have yet to find another team of clinicians more devoted to patient care or the concept of community psychiatry. I will be eternally grateful to Thelma Leslie and Wilma Crane for hiring and guiding me and to all of my friends and associates on this talented team of doctors, nurses and social workers for my clinical education.

My initial briefing on the subject of physical restraint and seclusion was pretty limited - always use a show of force whenever possible and never hurt a patient. Nine months later, in January 1974, we found ourselves with a very large, agitated, threatening and psychotic young man who was court-committed to the hospital and demanding immediate discharge. Following the "get a lot of people together" strategy we called hospital security and had him surrounded at the door of the nurses' station and attempted to talk him into accompanying us to seclusion voluntarily. In his confusion he had let the jacket he was wearing fall off his shoulders, down to the creases of his elbows. He suddenly stooped forward to grab an upholstery-covered brick (a door stop) and glared at his target - two secretaries who were sitting in the nurses' station. With his jacket drawing his arms behind him, I grabbed him in the only way that made sense at the time and discovered what is now known as the Primary Restraint Technique (PRT).

I used the PRT exclusively over the next 12 years in every situation that required physical restraint. The reaction of patients to the PRT (and to me post crisis) was very interesting. We found that when a PRT was applied in an appropriately caring "affective" context, the event would actually facilitate the therapeutic relationship, most notably with patients who had been unable to establish or maintain a treatment relationship previously. This observation led me to develop the Tension/Tension Reduction Cycle (T/TR Cycle) and the Solid Object Relationship Model (SORM), which were initially taught to first year Psychiatric Residents at the Institute of Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia's prestigious psychoanalytic training institute for physicians.

While most patients responded positively to a standing PRT, some situations required a takedown. Although I never hurt or injured a patient with it, the forward takedown method I was using during this period had potentially greater impact forces than I wanted. In January 1980, I enrolled at a local martial art school in my determined quest to find a better takedown method for the PRT and to fill in the huge gaps in my own understanding of personal defense and other physical issues. Two years later, while practicing self-defense, I took a "deep step back" and immediately devised what every HWC student knows to be the "Standard PRT Takedown." The very next day I had the need to restrain a patient and used the standard takedown for the first time in a "real time" situation. I left Pennsylvania Hospital in 1984 to formally establish Handle With Care Behavior Management System. In March 2001, The Primary Restraint Technique became the first physical technique in the history of the US Patent Office (US Patent# 6273091) for "An Apparatus and Method for Safely Maintaining a Restraining Hold on a Person."	We will never know exactly how many "saves" can be credited to the PRT.

HWC Verbal Program Introduction

If you have never been through the Handle With Care Verbal Program and you are reading these pages for the first time, this manual will appear minimal, linear and one dimensional. That is deliberate on my part. I taught this program for many years before I taught others how to deliver it. Many of the people who find themselves teaching it for the first time have never taught any subject in front of a group before.

My challenge was to lay out the verbal program in a format that is clear to even the most inexperienced trainer. Consequently, I decided upon a "write this, ask that" format. I rely heavily on you to make it three dimensional, to give it color and to ensure that it supports your mission as an agency and the regulations that govern the care you provide. Think of it as a skeleton, with you placing the meat on the bones, so to speak. I encourage you to use examples of behavior and situations that draw from your own experience, ideally, referencing client's who are known to the participants and who best illustrate the points made. The verbal program was not written to be read to a class. If you simply read the verbal program to your students, you will have to wake up the class when you are finished. It was written to facilitate a process of engagement with your students on a very difficult subject and who, like all human beings, have emotional blind spots. Of course, clients will shine a spotlight on those blind spots during their worst of times and it is always better to put a light on your own blind spots in a physically and emotionally safe place before they do i.e., training. Crisis intervention training should focus on the participant and not so much on clients. As relevant as the client is to the problem, the verbal program is not really about them. It is about us.

While there are overlapping skill sets that need to be taught to human service workers, there is a tendency to make the subject of crisis intervention much more complicated than it actually is, at the risk of missing the point. It was never my intention to replace other important trainings that are more client centric.

The Tension/Tension Reduction Cycle is a simple timing model for when and how to time an intervention and when to withdraw one. When teaching the Solid Object Relationship Model, we ask our students to reference the therapeutic behavior and emotional demeanor (the "affect") of the best crisis intervention worker that the agency has on staff. All of the attributes the solid object brings to the crisis intervention table are human and intrinsic to all those who are suited to human services and not everyone is. However, I have yet to find an agency that didn't have

someone on staff who was worthy of being referenced and who the participants can readily imagine being the focus of discussion about what it means to behave as a solid object. It is always easier to paint pictures when you have a point of reference.

The self-analysis components of the training are intended to enable participants to take a personal inventory of their assets and liabilities in order to recalibrate their emotional thermostats. Those who tend to be timid and less assertive than good care and common sense dictate should be encouraged to turn their "thermostat" up over time, by way of routine self reflection through the debriefing process and good day-to-day supervision and most of all, achieving a higher level of confidence.
Likewise, those who are too emotionally volatile should learn how to turn their thermostat down. No amount of training can fix a broken personality.

The beauty of this system is that you do not have to be perfect to be successful - just honest and real. We all make mistakes and to some extent that is ok as long as one profits from them. The secret is to create self-correcting internal systems within an agency that enable the agency and the people working there to modify approach and performance. It includes insisting on debriefing all crisis intervention events, even those that go well, as a matter of policy, even if it is not convenient to do so.

Finding the time to improve performance is rarely convenient.

Module 1 - The Handle With Care Philosophy

Time: 30 Minutes


Materials: None



Purpose/Goal:		To introduce the Handle With Care philosophy and operating assumptions.

Performance objectives: At the end of this module, participants will be able to:

? Understand that this philosophy is consistent with Department Policy regarding non-violent crisis management
? State this philosophy

HANDLE WITH CARE PHILOSOPHY


HANDLE WITH CARE IS DEDICATED TO THE REDUCTION OF INSTITUTIONAL VIOLENCE THROUGH:

? Tension reduction

? Staff use of preventative actions that result in a decrease in the need for the use of physical restraint

? The use of prompt, skillful and appropriate intervention when physical restraint is necessary, in order to minimize injuries to children and staff

? Creating a universal perception of physical and psychological safety in the milieu

ALL VERBAL AND PHYSICAL INTERVENTIONS OPERATE FROM THE THESE ASSUMPTIONS:
? There is no dignity in allowing a child or adult to hurt himself or someone else

? He needs to be protected from the physical and emotional consequences of his behavior

? We need to be protected from the physical and emotional consequences of his behavior

? In order to act in his best interest, we need to be in control of our own feelings and behavior

? He is aware at some level that he is out of control and expects us to demonstrate the capacity to help bring him under control safely

? A person in crisis will know the difference between something done for him and something done to him only if we are clear about it first

? The skillful application of physical restraint is a critical extension of the therapeutic relationship

Module 2 - Tension/Tension Reduction Cycle

Time: 60 Minutes


Materials: None


Purpose/Goal: To enable staff to understand the dynamics of escalating and de-escalating tension.


Performance Objectives: At the end of this module, participants will be able to:

? Describe how tension contributes to inappropriate behavior in youth and staff.

? Identify responses and behaviors that indicate tension levels are rising.

? Understand the relationship between the Tension/Tension Reduction Cycle and observations of self, staff, clients and others.

? Understand when verbal interventions become necessary.

? Understand when physical interventions become necessary

? Understand how to combine both verbal and physical intervention

? Understand when to withdraw an intervention

TENSION/TENSION REDUCTION CYCLE






Instructor's Notes

1. Tension/Tension Reduction Cycle is a theoretical model, created by Bruce Chapman, used to illustrate the dynamics of escalating and de-escalating tension in individuals and groups.

2. It is based on an Eastern Philosophical perspective of balanced but opposing universal forces, i.e., hot/cold, good/bad, positive/negative and tension/relaxation.

3. It is not a time-dependent model, i.e., some individuals accelerate rapidly, and others over an extended period of time.

4. The model is used to time when to intervene and when to withdraw the intervention.

Ask:
What two main emotions generate tension; tension and anxiety are interchangeable terms?

Answer: Anger and Fear


I Add	Anger and Fear to the cycle.



These emotional states can be the result of both internally and externally produced conflicts.

Definitions:

Internally generated conflict:
Responses to an event not experienced or shared by others. Examples: Delusions, hallucinations or delayed reactions to a real event

Example: a psychotic person is in a room by themselves. There is nothing going on externally that would explain his sudden agitation.

Externally generated conflict:
A direct response to an observable event shared by others.

Example: You make a request or give a directive to a client and he becomes agitated

Explain:
As tension accelerates up the cycle, tension is like electrical energy, it seeks discharge - it needs to go someplace (accentuate the point by drawing the arrow up the right of the cycle).


Explain:
As tension accelerates up the cycle it drives changes in behavior as it seeks discharge.

Just as tension can be generated by both internally and externally produced conflicts, the discharge of that tension can be directed inwardly and/or outwardly.

Features of an Inwardly directed or delayed style of discharging tension:
? Acceleration is gradual and usually over an extended timeframe.
? Self mutilation, suicidal behavior (or a history of self mutilation, suicidal behavior).
? Social withdrawal marked by a decrease in: Motor activity
Speech production
? Social withdrawal marked by an increase in:
Avoidance of eye contact "quiet and withdrawn" "moodiness"
? Ruminating or repeating thoughts with a depressive, suicidal or violent themes.

Features of an outwardly directed or immediate style of discharging tension:

? Acceleration is more rapid, impulsive and usually over a short timeframe.
? History of destruction/abuse of property and assaults
? Instigating others to the above.

Most people fall into one of the two styles of discharging tension. Some can have features of both.


Ask:
Who is more dangerous?

Answer: Most people will answer, the inwardly/delayed


Ask:


Why?

? They tend to attract less attention if they are quiet and withdrawn whereas the immediate style attracts staff intervention earlier in the cycle because of the clearer signals e.g. pacing and other behaviors.

? A person who becomes more outwardly agitated creates more opportunities to "bleed off' tension, which in turn provide opportunities for therapeutic intervention. The delayed style "holds on to" tension.

Explain:
As tension accelerates up the cycle it drives changes in behavior as it seeks discharge. Think about a situation that has made you feel very angry or afraid.

I create a scenario where we are all sitting comfortably and a loud sound comes from outside the room - BAM!

Ask:
How did that make your body feel?

Answer: Produces autonomic changes in heart rate (increases), respiration or breathing (increases), sweaty palms, muscle tension, shakey/wobbly feeling, etc.

Explain: Your body perceives a threat, often before we are even aware of the exact nature of the threat and the adrenal glands begin dumping adrenaline in response to that threat.





Add "Autonomic Responses" to the cycle.






Add "Motor Activity" to the cycle - start pacing.


Ask: What am I doing now? (pacing)

We cannot be aware of autonomic nervous system changes in another person (unless you are taking the persons pulse or counting respirations while they are becoming agitated).

With the outward or immediate style, as outside observers, what we can observe are changes in the person's motor activity:
? Pacing
? Restlessness
? Abrupt movements
? More animated
Ask: How about the inward or delayed style?

 Answer: You will see a decrease in motor activity as the person becomes more withdrawn and sullen.


There is a larger point to be made here. Both styles do exhibit changes in motor activity, it is important that we watch for shifts in motor activity in either direction:

? Someone who is normally quiet and becomes more visibly agitated.
? Someone who is normally animated becoming more quiet and withdrawn.



j Add "Speech" to the cycle.


Ask: What happens to a person's speech production as he escalates up the cycle?


Answer:

Outward/Immediate Style:

? Increase in the rate of speech
? Pressured speech
? Increase in volume
? Speech pathology (stammering, stuttering)
? Profanity

Inward/Delayed Style

? A decrease or the complete absence of speech production.

Once again, any shift in speech production, in either direction, is noteworthy.


Add "Indirectly threatening behavior" to the cycle.


Explain:

As the person escalates higher on the cycle you may see more subtle or indirectly threatening remarks including:

? Expression of suicidal ideation or intent.
? Expression of homicidal ideation or intent.



Add "Overtly threatening behavior" to the cycle.



Explain:
As the tension moves even higher on the cycle, you may see more directly threatening and imposing behaviors including:
? Intimidation
? Verbal abuse
? "In your face" threatening behavior. (Feel free to get in a participants face menacingly in the front row for dramatic effect :)
There is a point, as we reach the top of the cycle where the tension cannot be contained, compensated for or tolerated any longer. At the moment this threshold is reached, the tension is precipitously (suddenly) discharged.


I Add (dramatically) the top horizontal arrow.

? You do not want to be standing directly in front of this person at the moment that tension is being precipitously discharged.

Types of Discharge:
? Destructive behavior --wall puncher, chair thrower
? Self harm or mutilation
? Assault on another person


Following the sudden discharge of tension there will a dramatic drop in tension.




Ask: Have you ever been involved in a restraint and after a fierce struggle the person says, 'Tm ok, you can let go of me!"?

What were your feelings while you were restraining this person?

Answer: While our feelings during an application of force are varied, most mature people would reply that they would rather be doing anything but the restraint.


The point of this section is to illustrate that our own feelings during a restraint can interfere with our judgment when it comes to terminating the restraint or "letting go". We may let go too early or too late if we do not keep our own feelings in check and focus on process. If we let go too early we risk another cycle of escalating tension. If we let go too late, we damage trust.

Explain: If we can agree with the point made previously (in the "HWC Philosophy" Module 1), i.e., that a person who is out of control is aware at some level that they are out of control and he wants (expects) us to demonstrate the capacity to bring him under control, we have demonstrated our capacity by successfully performing the physical restraint. In the absence of his internal controls, we have supplied external controls.

It is critical that we systematically withdraw the physical control in an "affect neutral" manner that will ensure that his internal controls have been re-established. The "physical letting go process" (Module 11) is a staged withdrawal of the external controls with the client as an active partner in the withdrawal process. The process must include a calm and honest discussion with him about the circumstances, consequences and future expectations at the completion of each physical step.

Failure to properly withdraw a physical restraint can damage trust, create confusion and ultimately compromise your relationship. It may also unnecessarily prolong the current episode or begin a new episode, which is never without additional risk to safety and the integrity of the milieu.



STAGES OF THE CYCLE



Explain: The earlier we intervene, the greater the chance of avoiding physical restraint.

Ask:
What is the most powerful tool at our disposal for reducing tension?

Answer: Our Relationship with the person.

Explain:

Early Cycle. Early in the Cycle we use our Relationship skills to help the individual channel their tension appropriately. Observable behavioral clues in this section are: requests for attention or assistance, shifts in motor activity and speech.

Mid Cycle. The higher in the Cycle, the greater the need for limit-setting and implementation of structural controls. Observable behavioral changes in the middle section are: indirect threats or verbal warnings of homicidal or suicidal thoughts.

Top of Cycle. When physical restraint is necessary, it should be timed just before the tension is discharged. Observable behavioral changes in the high section are: actively assault or suicidal behavior and destruction of property.

Ask:
Does this cycle apply only to the individual being restrained?

Answer: No. It applies to everyone exposed to the event including intervention staff and other clients.
Ask:
For questions or comments.

COMPLETE TENSION/TENSION REDUCTION CYCLE


PRECIPITOUS DISCHARGE
When Tension Exceed.? Tolerance Tltreslwld


ANGER/FEAR

Module 3 - The Solid Object Relationship Model

Time: 90 Minutes


Materials: None




Purpose/Goals: To enable staff to develop and utilize the relationship skills to reduce tension.

Performance Objectives: At the end of this module, participants will be able to:

? Define ego and explain its function.

? Understand the underlying dynamics for establishing a therapeutic relationship.

? Understand the testing process and begin to identify our person "buttons" (stressors).

? Demonstrate effective verbal intervention strategies and skills.

A Few Thoughts regarding the Solid Object Relationship Model


The assessment and interactive components of Handle With Care are based on the simple assumption that an angry or fearful person in crisis is "aware" of his emotional instability and instinctively seeks equilibrium by holding on to or "attaching" himself to a larger and more stable object or person - a relationship. If I suddenly pushed you from behind, you'd instinctively try to hold on to something - anything - rather than fall down.

Predictably, a client in crisis "tests" the emotional solidity of the people (objects) around them by activating anger and fear responses. The Verbal Program is intended to motivate participants to identify their emotional liabilities in a crisis and learn how to manage them. Realistic role-playing exercises help staff learn how to intervene while remaining calm, centered and focused throughout this testing process - in other words, a solid object. Some people are better than others at "talking people down." An organization can profit by examining what makes their best staff so successful and by creating internal systems (like mandatory incident debriefings) that enable the organization to be self-correcting.



INTRODUCTION

1. Explain that you will be discussing "The Relationship Between Ego and Out of Control Behavior (write this on the board).

2. Acknowledge that there are many valid ways to examine human behavior. Today we will be using a simplified Ego model.


SIMPLIFIED EGO MODEL:

1. Define Ego:
? Ego is that part of the mind that experiences the external world through the senses, organizes the thought processes rationally and governs action.
? Ego is the personality component that is conscious, most immediately controls behavior and is most in touch with the environment.
? Ego is the psychic GLUE that keeps our thinking and our behavior in sync.

2. Ask: How do healthy "well compensated" adults handle tension?

? Set up a scenario between you and a group member were both angry with each other. There are appropriate and inappropriate ways of dealing with this conflict.
? Inappropriate - punch the other person.
? Ineffective - walk away (better than punching but doesn't resolve the issue or precipitant).
? Appropriate - what most healthy and well compensated adults do - they recognize they are angry, the talk about it with the other person and then they problem solve a solution.

Explain: That because we are healthy and well compensated, i.e., have an intact ego function, that we can effectively channel tension into appropriate problem-solving behavior. Make the point: One of the goals of treatment is to help clients acquire or maximize their capacity to manage their emotions as effectively.


List: The types of problems your clients bring with them to you that could cause impaired Ego function. The list should include all disorders that are organic (biological) and/or functional (psychological).

Including:
Personality Disorders
Major Psychological Disorders -- psychosis and/or depression Learning disabilities
Acute Intoxication (drugs) Organic Disorders

Explain:

? Clients manifest ego deficits as seen by the spectrum of maladaptive and pathological behaviors and difficulty channeling tension into appropriate and problem solving behaviors.
? The long-term goal of treatment is to help the individual internalize socially acceptable behaviors by developing internal limits, boundaries and the capacity to manage emotions and behaviors.
? In the absence of internal controls, we must occasionally and temporarily supply external controls. The goal is (always) to withdraw the external controls as the internal controls are established or re-established.







3.3

THE TESTING PROCESS:


Ask: Have you noticed that the clients under your care have a sixth sense for knowing those (sometimes hidden) things about ourselves that we are emotionally reactive to and are able to provoke or manipulate an emotional reaction in us?


Exercise:	Make a pass around the room and have each participant identify those things that make them either angry or afraid.

These are important words to use:

Identify "something a client can say or do to you or someone else that is guaranteed to provoke an emotional response" (it does not mean that you acted inappropriately as a result).

Draw a circle around the words "anger/fear" on the T/TRC.	Repeat the question several times so there can be no confusion that anger and fear are included for consideration.

Responses might include provocative remarks about: Weight
Race Complexion Sex
Our personality traits Spitting
Threats towards staff or family members Defiance
Etc.


Most people refer to these weak spots or vulnerabilities as "buttons".

Note: If your sessions are like mine, almost every participant will mention something that provokes angry responses. Very few will consider those things that make them feel afraid. If that happens; lead a discussion about the significance of the fact that no one is likely to consider a fear response to the question. My interpretation is that anger is a much more accessible emotion.

THE SOLID OBJECT:


Paint this picture:
You have an individual who is out-of-control and being dealt with by 4 staff. Out of all the staff members dealing with the situation the client focuses his attention on one particular staff member and immediately starts to calm down. You notice that this occurs in almost every crisis this staff member is involved in.

We are going to refer to this person as the "Solid Object"


Ask:	Do you know someone like this on staff? Lead a Discussion


Ask:
What qualities does this staff member demonstrate?	List them:


Some of the answers should include:
? Calm and unafraid
? Able to make (appropriate) eye contact
? Centered
? Balanced
? Empathetic
? Understanding
? Able to listen
? Verbally Reassuring
? Consistent and firm without being intimidating
? Fair
? Non-threatening but not vague or "wishy washy"


Explain: The problem is, when we are faced with someone is challenging, defiant or threatening, we tend to fall along a spectrum of either over reacting or under reacting.

Under/Over React Exercise:	Have each group member identify whether his or her "tendency" is to underreact or to overreact. It is critically important for each person to recognize his own tendency. The ultimate goal of HWC's Verbal Program is to help each practitioner gain the self-awareness necessary to recalibrate his tendency in the direction of the affect neutrality required of a Solid Object.

Draw this on the board and define the range of reactions:





Explain:	The person we have been defining as the Solid Object does not over react. He or she does not under react. He stays calm, centered, etc., and this is what we watch take place.

THE SOLID OBJECT RELATIONSHIP MODEL (SORM)



Exercise: Have each participant identify one thing or circumstance that he or she is likely to react to emotionally; something that is guaranteed to make you angry or afraid. "I hate it when... " Answers will typically range from defiant behavior to racial slurs, sexually provocative comments, lying, spitting, etc. Allow for a group discussion for each answer. Feel free to start with yourself.


Instructor Note: The purpose of this next section is to illustrate that by behaving as a "Solid Object" during the testing process, you allow a connection or attachment to take place with you. In fact, the testing process is a vitally important element to the formation of a therapeutic relationship.




Out of C.o.n,trol Client


The Solid Object







Paint a dynamic and dramatic picture for students by giving a typical scenario. For instance, use the scenario of asking the client to leave or go to an area.
The client responds with a personally insulting and provocative return volley using my own obvious (to the participants) physical liabilities as fuel. (Be brave :)

If, through the insult, I remain calm, centered, focused, etc., it allows an attachment to take place.

It is at that precise moment that I draw the "attachment arrow" - from the client (the chaotic swirl) to the Solid Object (black circle).

The net effect is a reduction of the client's tension level that is palpable as he shifts emotionally to engage with you.

Note: For the next example, use a much more serious and painful provocation; one that the group will find understandable.

Note: Try to use something personally painful from your own life, if you can. Role-play a personally emotional response for your scenario for the benefit of your participants.

(In my case, my mother died when I was a teenager and the testing scenario shifts to comments about my mother...)

"If, at this moment, I become defensive and reactive... "

Dramatically draw the "power shift arrow" from the Solid Object back to the client.
The net effect on his tension level is, it escalates.



Explain:

By attempting to provoke an emotional response from us, the out-of-control person is testing our solidity as an object. It is one thing to look solid. It is another to behave solidly. The client has a very real need to test the solidity of an object before he can feel comfortable attaching himself to it. This is a critically necessary step for most clients.

By reacting emotionally during the testing process, we convince the client that we are anything but solid. The key to success is to remain "affect neutral". The trick is not to take it personally. As we stated previously, at some level the out-of-control person wants to regain control (or homeostasis) and 'wants/needs' you to demonstrate the capacity to help him regain his internal control. By behaving as an "affect neutral" Solid Object, a shift in the relationship can take place, resulting in a reduction of tension as he gains stability because of it.

When utilized correctly, this positive shift in his relationship with the Solid Object can be channeled and redirected into a different relationship with the entire milieu. It can be a pivotal moment.

TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTER TRANSFERENCE

? Have you ever felt a stronger connection to a particular individual under your care, or experienced a strong feelings of dislike for another and couldn't put our finger on the reason why?

? We will try to explain why some individuals under our care react to us as if we were someone else and why we sometimes react to particular client as if he/she were someone else.

? Many of the mistakes we make with individuals under our care are the results of strong positive or negative feelings about those individuals.


A. Ask:
What kind of mistakes are we more likely to make when we dislike an individual.

Answer:
We may treat them more punitively than others, we may become more critical of their behavior.


B. Ask:
What kind of mistakes are we more likely to make when we like an individual.

Answer:
We may relax the rules, we may show favoritism and we may allow ourselves to be manipulated.


C. Transference. The reproduction of positive and negative feelings that were at one time associated with another person or a past experience that are now (unconsciously) transferred to a new individual (individual often in authority), in this case the care worker.


D. Counter Transference. The same dynamic in reverse only they occur in the authority figure.

? This is a normal phenomenon and occurs in any helping relationship.

Ask:
How can transference and counter transference benefit the therapeutic relationship?

Answer:
When we "remind" individuals under our care of a strong positive figure in their past i.e. a parent, other family members, or close friends, with whom they felt safe, secure and trusting.


E. Remain Professional. If you feel you are experiencing this phenomena and it is interfering with your ability to do good work with a client, find someone with insight to discuss.

Module 4 - Nonverbal and Verbal Intervention Techniques

Time: 90 Minutes

Materials: None




Purpose/Goal: To enable staff to learn a range of appropriate Verbal and Nonverbal intervention skills.


Performance Objectives: At the end of this module, participants will be able to:

? Actively demonstrate the ability, during role playing exercises, to reduce tension via a variety of intervention strategies as applied to the Tension!Tension Reduction Cycle (TTRC) and Solid Object Relationship Model (SORM).

The Key to De-Escalation is Your Relationship With The Client


Form a relationship by behaving as a Solid Object:

? Calm
? Confident
? Centered
? Non reactive
? Focused
? Empathetic
? Allow the connection/attachment to take place. Some clients will require time and a prolonged testing process to connect. How long depends, in part, on you.

Avoid responding emotionally to provocation. It's not personal. It is just a test.
? The out-of-control person is compelled to test the "solidity" of the objects around him; individually and with regard to staff at large - collectively. The amount of testing is inversely proportional to his capacity for trust.
? Many clients are highly successful at getting others to act out against them.
? Reacting punitively reinforces the shame and the negative self-image of the client.
? In a pathological manner this provides the individual with a sense of empowerment. (Don't' let the tail wag the dog) and devalues you as a Solid Object.


Instead, appeal to the healthy components of the client's personality in order to form an alliance.
Remember:	At some level his core personality is "aware" it is losing control or balance. A personality that is out of balance will reflexively reach out to larger more stable objects outside itself to help it maintain equilibrium or homeostasis.*
Homeostasis is defined (Merriam-Webster) as: a relatively stable state of equilibrium or a tendency toward such a state between the different but interdependent elements or groups of elements of an organism, population, or group.

Exception: Clients who have organic or functional impairments that interfere with consciousness and cognition. Example: Someone emerging from a coma and is acutely agitated. You cannot depend on the relationship for de-escalation when the client is unaware you are with him.
? When an attachment is impossible because of consciousness or a primitive level of functioning, continue to demonstrate an appropriately caring affect and take whatever concrete actions are required to protect.


What you say is not as important as how you say it (and act).

? The good news is, we can all make verbal/de-escalation mistakes and miscalculations and still be successful.
? Be yourself. Be genuine, honest and empathetic. "Keep it real."
? The affective component (or emotional tone) to the communication is more powerful than the intellectual, which explains why you can work effectively with clients who are more intelligent than you are.
? Be aware that your body language - nonverbal communication (facial expressions, hand gestures, pointing etc.) reveals your true affect.
? If your own feelings about the client are interfering with your ability to do good work with him, recollect yourself or punt the intervention to someone else. Spend time debriefing yourself as to why you had such a difficult time (See "Transference/ Counter Transference").


Look for hurt and disappointment under a top (and much more visible) layer of anger.
? You can get beyond the anger layer with most clients by acknowledging and accepting the underlying emotion.
? It is easier to make misjudgments and miscalculations with a client when you share overlapping emotional issues and liabilities.

Continuously assess effectiveness of your approach (and be willing to recalibrate it, if necessary) based on the effect that it has on the client's tension level.

? For instance, if being quiet or ignoring the client accelerates his tension level or behavior, become more proactive and involved
? Conversely, if you find yourself being so involved or talkative that doing so is increasing tension, assume a less active or intrusive posture.
? It is just as possible to try too hard as it is to try too little. Avoid being either under or over involved. Be aware that "transference/counter transference" issues can cause emotional reactions to a client.


The higher the client falls on the Tension\Tension Reduction Cycle, the external controls become more critical.

Draw:
The three main threshold lines on the T/TRC model:
? Support - at this level, there is lots of flexibility within policy parameters.
? Limit Setting - at this level there is less flexibility; it is largely a matter of making choices with their attending positive and negative consequences at this level.
? PRT (or other "hands on" method) - at this level there is no flexibility and no equivocation. Perfect speed is being there at the right moment.
? 
SUPPORT:

? Support works best when the client already views you as a Solid Object.
? Intervention at this level requires accurate observations of the individual early in the crisis and immediate intervention before the crisis escalates.
? Support alone is not an appropriate mode of intervention when physical intervention is called for to prevent harm to self or others, although physical intervention can be accomplished in a very supportive way. Offer support simultaneously with limits.
? The primary goal of intervention at this level is to help the client articulate his feelings/self-observations and channel his tension towards appropriate (e.g. problem solving) behaviors.
? It is important that observations are communicated to other staff.

Modes of intervention at this level include:

1. Listen:

? Allow the client to ventilate verbally without your becoming defensive or reactive. This is difficult when you or other staff are the subjects of the complaint.
? Be willing to help the client assert him/herself in a given situation or correct an injustice. This enhances your position as a solid object. If other staff persons are involved, facilitate that process without undermining.


2. Accept:

? The validity of the feeling, if not the behavior. No one can tell another person how to feel.

3. Focus:

? On one issue at a time.


4. Encourage:

? Assertion (as opposed to aggression).

5. Offer:

? Alternative choices the client can make.

6. Contract:

? Agree on a course of action and follow through as if it were a contract.





























LIMIT SETTING:

? Limiting setting is a more difficult skill to acquire because the tension levels are higher, the stakes (risks) are higher, and your own tension levels are (potentially) more effected when defiance and challenging behaviors are manifested. Always offer support simultaneously with limits.


SHAME-ORIENTED PUNITIVE INTERVENTIONS, RETALIATION AND PUBLIC HUMILIATION DO NOT CONSTITUTE LIMIT SETTING.

Effective limit setting has three main elements:

1. Limits must be clear.

Add "clear" to its appropriate place in the cycle.


? Intellectually clear i.e., presented in an understandable manner.
? Affectively (or emotionally) clear i.e., without fear or hostility-AFFECT NEUTRAL.


Add "consistent" to the cycle.

2. Limits must be consistently set on.?.!! matters of policy, procedure and behavior effecting safety including:

? From staff person to staff person
? From day to day
? From shift to shift

When appropriate, lead a discussion contrasting any differences between the way your 3 shifts handle matters of policy, procedure and behaviors that effect safety.

Ask: Limits should not be set according to the mood of the staff. Based on your experience, how much limiting setting (at your/our facility) that takes place is based on the mood of the staff person setting the limits?
Lead a discussion.


3. All Limits set must be enforceable.

Add "enforceable" to the cycle.


? Positive and negative consequences i.e., earning or losing "points" or privileges to change or modify behavior must be consistently, fairly and conscientiously applied. The goal should be to achieve absolute programmatic predictability across all 3 shifts.

Lead a Discussion focusing on your agency's success or lack of success enforcing consequences within your program. What are you doing right (collectively)? Where do you have room for improvement?

? Direct care staff should share a commonly shared perception of where to "draw the line" on the use of "hands-on" methods, including the Escort Position and the PRT, as a matter of policy.
? Where and how those lines are drawn varies among agencies. A good example of the differences in agency policy regarding the use of force is when (if ever) it is appropriate to use a physical escort for simple non-compliance with a directive. Some agencies have compelling custody and control considerations with the population they care for and will draw the line earlier than other agencies who have the ability to take a more relaxed approach.

Lead a discussion to clarify the policy at your facility.

Elements of an effective limit setting intervention:
Limit setting is about presenting clear choices to the client. Positive and constructive choices have positive consequences. Conversely, negative and pathological choices have negative consequences.

Negative consequences should never be used as a threat. Negative consequences are simply the natural result of making bad choices and should be presented as such.

If the programmatic consequences your milieu or program relies upon do not generally motivate positive decision making and problem solving behaviors with your clients, the problem may very well be your programmatic consequences.
CLEAR
1. Intellectually clear i.e. presented in an understandable fashion.
2. Affectively (emotionally) clear.

CONSISTENT
1. Consistent from one staff to another. The-out-of control person
experiences staff as a" collective ego" and will "bounce" from staff person to staff person to test the limits and manipulate responses.
2. Consistent from shift to shift; day to day.

Note: In-team situations where there is more than one staff person involved -- only 1 person should talk.

ENFORCEABLE
1. Do not verbalize consequences you have no intention or capacity to enforce.
2. Remember our fears often interfere with our ability to enforce consequences. Limits need to be evenly and concisely set and should not be perceived as a threat when used appropriately.
3. Continue to offer alternatives. (i.e. Giving a individual a directive to go to his room can be followed by, an offer to "talk about it later" after he has complied with the directive.)
4. Be willing to draw an appropriate line i.e., to follow through with a stated consequence - in accordance with your agency's policies, procedures and sensibilities.
5. Confront the behavior - Not the person.
6. Avoid touch at this level unless you are prepared to transition into physical restraint.

PHYSICAL INTERVENTION:

Note: The purpose of this exercise is to collectively calibrate the group's perception of when it is appropriate and timely to use physical intervention.


Add "PRT" to its appropriate place in the cycle.



1. Use this direct quote:

"Perfect speed is being there at the right moment; no sooner; no later."

We use a series of demonstrations to illustrate this point to the group.

Punch demo:
Pick someone sitting in the front row and tell the group that you are about to throw a punch at him (reassure the person you will not actually strike him). Ask the group to shout "NOW!" when they need to "do something" (we'll be defining what "something" means later on).

Punch #1 - Try to throw the punch before they are able to shout "NOW". Make sure the group is too slow to react. Compliment the group on shouting "NOW" eventually but point out it was not fast enough to protect the person you are punching.

Punch #2 - exaggerate or slow down the speed of the second punch, pausing with your fist drawn back, to give the group enough time to react this time. Compliment the group for recalibrating their timing. No one will be more happy with that than the person being punched.

You can set up a nearly identical demonstration, only using a "wall punching" demo instead.

Thrown object demo:
Position a chair about 10 feet away from the person you are using for this demonstration. Tell the group that you are going to throw the chair at your partner and they should shout "NOW" when they need to do "something" (you will define what "something" means in a moment). In the most threatening tone you can muster, look your partner in the eyes and tell him you are going to thrown the chair at him.
Dramatically, look towards the chair and begin walking towards it.

Note: We want the group to shout "NOW" when you look at the chair and/or start walking towards it.

The point is, you have clearly announced your intention to throw the chair and you have the means to carry the threat out. As in real life, a decision is needed quickly because in a matter of seconds, he will have the means to carry through with his threat.

Definition of "something":
There are really only two immediate choices to make in a "real time/real speed" event.

1. Dramatically increase your distance i.e., run for help.
2. Dramatically decrease your distance i.e., assume responsibility by acting independently.

Lead a discussion about the wisdom and judgment involved with both choices. Points should include:
? Most of the time, terminating the intervention or staging a tactical retreat will be the best decision because it allows you to use a team approach and buy time. Most will agree that this makes the most sense for many reasons; safety, witnesses, etc.
? However, if leaving the scene (to get help) places another client or staff person at risk of being seriously injured or compromised, might that impact upon your decision and motivate independent action on your part?
? Never  ask or expect anyone to take on more than he or she is capable of. If managing it yourself is futile, always get help. Factor the crisis intervention capabilities into scheduling.

Note: We appreciate that agencies have their own sensibilities concerning taking independent action and the expectation is that you craft these demonstrations in a manner that supports those sensibilities.


SELF EVALUATION EXERCISES:

1. Ask your students to create a list of (what they consider to be), the assets
they personally bring to a crisis.

Note: I have them put their pens down when they are finished each list to provide adequate time and to determine when to move on.

2. Ask your students to create a list of (what they consider to be), the
liabilities they personally bring to a crisis
3. Have them hand their list to the person next to them for a reality check and thorough discussion of their lists. Facilitate that discussion.

TENSION REDUCTION EXERCISES

Instructor's Notes:

Divide the larger group into smaller groups of 5 or more. Explain:
? The importance of playing their roles realistically -- make the staff get into their roles. Staff can model themselves after a client they know.
? The importance of having the individuals respond realistically to both appropriate and inappropriate intervention.
? The issue may not be able to be resolved at the SUPPORT level and the staff may be forced to proceed to the next level of intervention. Do not allow the SUPPORT level to be surpassed.
? Provide the setting before the role play. Where are you in the facility? Are there any other client's present? How do you call for help? Etc.
? After each role play, discuss the results.

SUPPORT LEVEL ROLE PLAYS:

Note: You can ask them to pick from these or you can let each group arrive at their own. Debrief all the groups after each role play together as the larger group so each can profit from the other.

Scenario 1

You approach a client who is showing signs agitation (pacing). He is avoiding eye contact, and in the past has destroyed property when he is upset. What do you do?

Scenario 2

You are approached by a client who tells you that he is going to punch out the evening supervisor when he comes in to work. He states matter-of-factly. What do you do?
Scenario 3
A Client comes storming into the room after a counseling session and kicks a chair before sitting down in it. In the past he was required quiet time in his room for this behavior. What do you do?

Scenario 4
A Client is refusing to participate in program and looks very depressed. He asks you to leave him alone. What do you do?

LIMIT SETTING LEVEL ROLE PLAYS:

Each support scenario escalates for the next role play:
Scenario 1.
Supportive interventions have failed and the individual announces that he is going to "trash the place". What do you do?

Scenario 2.
The individual is clearly unable or unwilling to discuss the matter with the evening supervisor. His intention to follow through with his threat to punch the supervisor's lights out is clear. The supervisor is due in any minute. What do you do?

Scenario 3.
The individual continues to rant and rave - you determine that he should go to his room. What do you do?

Scenario 4.
The depressed individual suggests that there are plenty of sharp objects around and he knew a kid who cut himself. What do you do?

TIMING HANDS-ON INTERVENTION - ESCORT & PRT LEVEL ROLE PLAYS:
Support and limit setting interventions have been either ineffective or the situation has escalated so rapidly that lesser interventions were not possible. take each of the following scenarios to the next level. Rather than have each sub group resolve it's own intervention at this level, provide the proper solution to each scenario with the group at large together. Solve the scenario in within the context of your specific use of force policy (Module 5).

Scenario 1
He looks in the direction of a chair and takes a step towards it. What do you do?

Scenario 2
Suddenly the supervisor appears and the client makes an overt move in his/her direction. What do you do?

Scenario 3
Screaming an obscenity in your face he puts his hands up and tries to shove you.
What do you do?

Scenario 4
The out of control individual suddenly produces a razor and threatens to cut herself, if the staff doesn't get out of her face. What do you do?

Module 5 - Use of Force Policy



Place your written policy and procedure document in this section.






Module 6 A- Escape Techniques

Time: 3 Hours


Materials: None


Purpose/Goal: To teach staff the skills they need to protect themselves when clients become physically aggressive.


Performance Objectives: At the end of this module, participants will be able to:

? State the difference between an uncomfortable, dangerous or life threatening situation.
? Release from 4 types of wrist grabs.
? Release from 3 types of chokeholds
? Release from a bite.
? Release themselves from hair pulls.

Uncomfortable, Dangerous or Life Threatening?

Reinforce that we are ethically and legally obligated to use the least amount of force necessary to defend ourselves against a physical assault. This is true even in a "street" self defense situation. This obligation is greater in an institutional environment where staff has custody and control and it is even greater when there is a therapeutic or professional relationship between the person committing the assault and staff.

Some of the personal defense techniques in HWC are "detuned" versions of pain compliant methodologies where I've managed to retain their mechanical advantage while minimizing any possibility of injury. The "front choke" and "cross hand wrist grab" releases are good examples.

Because staff also have an obligation to protect other clients and staff from assaults, many of the techniques in the program have been adapted to "3rd person saves. In the Handle With Care universe everyone is safe.


Getting Started

Instructors Notes (stuff Bruce told you)

? Never try to train more people than the room or you and your co-trainer(s) instructor-skill level can accommodate.
? Clarify "lead trainer" vs. "co-trainer" duties with each other ahead of time. The lead trainer broadcasts "the count". Co-trainers say as little as possible (especially during the "walk-thru" portion) and use the "wind 'em up/ let 'em go" method exclusively
? Crowd management. Always maintain awareness of the "big picture" with regard to obstacles in the room, participant behavior etc. Remember that participants will tend to drift toward the perimeter of the room and one other. Be a traffic cop. Even your best students will be so focused on what they are doing that they will be oblivious to traffic problems etc.
? Time management. Keep a clock in view if possible. Unfortunately, you'll need to drive the learning process on a limited time line. Accept the possibility that the less physically talented staff may have to go through the basic training more than once to gain proficiency.

? Never proceed to the next step until the previous step has been accomplished. This especially applies to the count. Make sure they stay in sequence.
? Whenever going too fast is a problem the answer is always to S-L-0-W	D-0-
W-N !
? Insist that students establish their balance at the end of each repetition to the extent of their ability. Telling them to freeze at the end of any count makes any lack of balance painfully obvious (I'm sure you'll feel as guilty about it as I do).
? ALWAYS make your behavioral expectations absolutely clear
? They will have some expectations of the training as well, that will drive virtually every question they have
? They'll expect everything you teach them will work with ABSOLUTELY everybody ALL of the time, no matter how big or how strong or how much faster he is:
? They'll also expect that everything you teach them CANNOT POSSIBLY be countered.
Note: Be sure to break the bad news on both expectations
? Make the 3rd personal defense technique (2 on 2 wrist grab) your target to establish your control of the group



Protocol

? Remove all wrist jewelry, pens, keys, coins, watches or other objects or articles of clothing that could be harmful to themselves or others.
? Have them find a partner of roughly equal size and weight. Use comfort level as a gauge.
? Have them decide who will be #1 and who will be #2.

The Briefing (set clear expectations)

? NO DEATH CHOKES NO DEATH GRABS-TAKE IT EASY ON YOUR PARTNER
? SLOW AND SMOOTH IS BETTER THAN FAST AND JERKY
? TRY TO UNDERSTAND THE PRINCIPLE INVOLVED WITH EACH TECHNIQUE
? SING "MEN... MEN... MEN

Same Side Wrist Grab

The Demo:

Explain that the weak link is the grip between the thumb and index finger.


The Count:


? Make a fist
? Reach in and grab your own fist
? Take a Deep step back (don't let them take it yet. Use that annoying "ehh, ehh, ehh" if necessary)
? And snap straight back to your chest
Note: Whenever a word or section of a count appears in bold, it calls for the lead trainer to raise or inflect their voice. Students are more likely to move on that part of the count when you do!)
(demo the technique at least 3 times)



The Walk Thru:
? #2s grab #1s. Walk them thru on the count until they're ready to practice. Make them stay on the count and don' t let them talk to each other. Co-trainers can make "wind 'em up" corrections only. I recommend having them "freeze" at the end on at least one repetition and having them box off their stance, i.e. "bring your right foot back to your left foot... make a 90 degree box with your heels....put that foot back again...2/3' s of your weight on the back leg."

Common mistakes
? Grip mistakes (have them use an over hand grip only. Demonstrate how to adapt the release to an underhand grip)
? Not stepping back with the opposite leg ("your other right")
? Starting off in artillery range
? Stance problems creating balance difficulties
? Tug instead of snap
? Not waiting to the "and snap" portion of the count to move
? Losing sight of their partner during the escape - always keep partner in view


The Practice:	Have them practice until they have it.

Repeat - with #1' s grabbing# 2' s. Walk them thru on the count until they're ready to practice.

Two (hands) on one wrist grab

The Demo:

Also very similar to the same side wrist grab. Weak link between the thumb and index finger. Using the arm as a lever breaks the grip.
The Count:
? Make a fist
? Reach in and grab your own fist
? Drop that elbow (point that fist straight up in the air)
? Take a deep step back...
? And Snap straight back to your chest (demo the technique at least 3 times)

The Walk Thru:
? #2s grab #1s. Walk them thru on the count until they're ready to practice. Make them stay on the count and don't let them talk to each other. Co-trainers can make "wind 'em up" corrections only.

Common mistakes
? Not reaching over the top
? Not dropping the elbow
? Starting off in artillery range
? Same mistakes as the same side wrist grab
The Practice:	Have them practice until they "have it." Be sure to switch wrists Repeat - with #1' s grabbing # 2' s.. Walk them thru on the count until they're
ready to practice. During the practice be sure to have them switch wrists


Two on two wrist grab

The Demo:

Also very similar to the same side wrist grab. Weak link between the thumb and index finger. Pointing both fists straight up in the air creates a lever.


The Count:


? Make two fists
? Role them up to the inside (Point those fists straight up in the air)

? Take a deep step back...
? And Snap straight back to your chest (demo the technique at least 3 times)

The Walk Thru:
? #2s grab #1s. Walk them thru on the count until they're ready to practice. Make them stay on the count and don't let them talk to each other. Co-trainers can make "wind 'em up" corrections only.

Common mistakes
? Not point both fists straight up in the air
? Same mistakes as the same side wrist grab
? Starting off in artillery range
Practice:	Have them practice until they "have it." Be sure to switch wrists Repeat - with #1' s grabbing # 2' s. Walk them thru on the count until they're
ready to practice. During the practice be sure to have them switch wrists


Cross hand grab release

The Demo:

Frame by frame using the count. Emphasize the importance of:
? Proper rotation of the wrist, i.e. without over or under rotating
? NO PRESSURE ON THE WRIST UNTIL IT'S FULLY ROTATED ON TO IT'S EDGE- (see illustration) FOLLOWED BY A SUDDEN ACCELERATION OF PRESSURE (TO CAUSE THE RELEASE)
 Note: this is often the reason you see the grabbing student let go before the push takes place. They're pushing hard enough to bother the grabbing person's wrist but not crisply enough to make them let go.
Executed properly, there should be no discomfort.
? No pressure on the shoulder with the other hand. The technique can (but shouldn't) be executed without it being on the shoulder at all. This hand (4 fingers in back/thumb on the front) only facilitates the transition to the PRT)
? Why do you want to hold on?

Insert"LOSER" picture here

The Count:
? Step in
? Open up your hand

? Rotate underneath and over the top - "reverse the grip"
? Hand on the shoulder
? Push and hold on
demo the technique as many times as necessary)

The Walk Thru:
? #2s grab #1s. Walk them thru on the count until they're ready to practice. Make them stay on the count and don't let them talk to each other. Co-trainers can make "wind 'em up" corrections only.
Common mistakes
? Step in with the wrong foot
? Rotating the hand in the wrong direction
? Starting off in artillery range
? All the stuff they missed while sleeping through your demo (see "The demo" above)
Practice:	Have them practice until they "have it." Be sure to switch wrists Repeat - with #1' s grabbing # 2' s.. Walk them thru on the count until they're
ready to practice. During the practice be sure to have them switch
wrists


Front choke/lapel grab:
(aka the "magic wrench") The Demo:
The best defense against any straight incoming attack (choking, lapel grab, shove) is the "outside to inside" block.


Demonstrate the front choke release frame by frame using the count. Emphasize the importance of:

? Blocking with an outside to inside block before he gets his hands on your throat. When it' s too late for that...
? Proper grip (beat the importance of the thumb placement on the back of the hand into them until they cry... well ok. whine). Oh yeah, make sure they keep it there
? NOT reaching away from their chest
? The arm in contact with the chest at a 90 degree angle, back straight, elbows in tight
? Good finishing stance and good posture - 2/3 of your weight on the back leg -

? Balance, balance, balance
? Tell lefties to do the opposite (mirror image)



? The Count:
? Tuck your chin
? Step back with the left leg and turn your body sideways.
? Reach in through the middle, grab the blade of the hand
? Bring the other hand up
? Step back with the right leg... and turn

The Walk Thru:
? #2s choke #1s - " with #1' s with their back in that (point clearly with your hand) direction.
Note: be sure to set the room up properly so you can see the grip they're taking and they can see you.

? 	Walk them thru on the count until they're ready to practice. Make them stay on the count and don' t let them talk to each other. Co-trainers can make "wind 'em up" corrections only.

? Common mistakes
? See stupid "Bruce tricks"

Stupid Bruce tricks:
? Spend A LOT of time on the walk thru
? Have the co-trainer(s) cruise the group and use "wind 'em up" in sync with the count checking for grip and all the other mistakes, as the lead trainer broadcasts the count (I know I said that before - just seeing if you're paying attention). Don't forget to help them turn the wrist against their chest ("screw the wrist into the chest")
? If you don' t have a co-trainer to assist, the best way to get them to take the correct grip on the very first try is the "wave" technique I showed you for the first repetition or two only. For those of you who don't know what I'm talking about, do this. I want you to reach higher... higher.....WAVE   got it?
? Just before the lead trainer broadcasts the "step back with the right leg and turn" portion of the count, he (or she) should ask the group (in your best asking voice possible so they actually answer you out loud) "are you going to reach away or bring them with you?" It will be the last thing they're thinking about before they take the step. It' s amazing how it works! It's not a formal part of the count - use it only when you need it.
? When they're over turning their upper body, try these two things in order:

? Have them step first and then turn the wrist against their chest). Some people can't do two things at the same time. You can use your hands to help.
? Putting them up against a wall to do the wrist-turn helps them isolate the movement. Remember that a small number of slow speed precise repetitions is always better than a high volume of fast imprecise repetitions. If they continue to over turn their upper body after putting them against the wall - do it again....and again...
Now that I think about it, if you have enough time, put everybody up against the wall to work on choke and lapel grabs.

Show them the "steering wheel" analogy as it relates to proper grip the turning the wrist on the correct axis.
Practice:	Have them practice until they "have it." Then have them do the "left/right" drill:
? Have everyone face in the same direction
? Be sure they have 2 steps worth of space behind them.
? Start with the original count to get them going - then show them how to step and reach for the grip simultaneously ("bring both hands up automatically") Shorten the count to	"left	right."
? When everyone is moving smoothly on the "left/right" count, have them quickly choke each other (use the "Frankenstein method" - hope I'm not losing you - it's a great trick to get them set up quickly). You have about 15 seconds to set them to move on the left/right count or you'll lose them
Repeat - with #1's choking #2' s. Don' t forget the "left/right" drill with them Demonstrate the other applications of this technique, including but limited to:
? 2 and 1-hand lapel grabs (be sure to reach over the top on a 2 hand grab and
keep his hand pinned against your chest as you do. On a 1 hand grab be sure to watch for the punch.
? Tie and apparel grabs.
? Pony tail grabs and an alternate side hair pull release.
? Third-person saves of every description when it involves hair pull or apparel grabs. Your responsibility to maintain a safe environment includes assaults by clients on other clients and other staff, yes?
? Breaking up fights when the contestants are holding onto each other

Two Hand Rear Choke

The Demo:

Frame by frame on the count; long version first, then the short version. Lefties can do the mirror image.

The Count:

Long version
? Raise your right arm
? Pick up your right leg
? Swing it behind you
          ? Turn and trap both his arms Short version:
? Raise your right arm
? Turn and trap
Note: When they inevitably point out the possibility of a knee counterstrike to your groin, point out that the faster you transition into the PRT the less likely the possibility of a counterstrike.

The Walk Thru:
#2s choke #1s. Walk them thru on the long count until they have it. Then switch to the short count.

Common mistakes
? Turning in the wrong direction
? Dropping the arm as they turn, finishing underneath the choking persons arms instead of trapping over the top
Note: in both cases use "wind 'em up" by tugging or tapping on the correct leg to swing or by placing his arm where it belongs. Once will usually do the trick.
? The choking person lets go before their arms become trapped (I say they're just not doing their job - get on 'em).

Practice:		This one is so easy that practicing is unnecessary. I refer to it as "comic relief" compared to the front choke release.

Repeat - with #1' s choking # 2' s. Walk them thru on the long count until they have it. Then switch to the short count.







6a-lO










































