
Area: Program and ServicesPolicy: 12 VAC 35-46-660Pages: 1 of 9Maintenance of Residents' RecordsIssued: October 7, 2013Revised
Policy:

The facility will ensure confidentiality for its residents and their records.

Procedures:

1. Storage of Resident Records:
a) The master filing system for residents maintained by YFT consists of program files, educational files, and medical files. The master filing system contains chronologically complete records on each resident.
b) Records for current and former residents will be kept in areas that are accessible to authorized staff and protected from unauthorized access, fire, and flood.
c) It is the responsibility of Case Managers to maintain and secure current resident files assigned to them at the time of admissions. 
d) When not in use, written records will be stored in a metal file cabinet or other metal compartment in locked offices/storage rooms.
e) At the end of each month, Houseparent will forward Medication Administration Records (MARs) to the Health Services Coordinator for review. Following the Health Services Coordinator?s review, MARs will be forwarded to Case Managers for filing in resident records.
f) Written and automated records will be retained in their entirety for a minimum of three years after the date of discharge. 
g) The face sheet will be retained permanently.
2. Confidentiality of Residents. In order to protect the confidentiality of residents, access to meetings and resident records will be as follows:
a) Attendance at resident service plan or evaluation team meetings will be restricted to staff members, special education consultants approved by YFT, therapist consultants approved by YFT, licensing representatives, visiting childcare providers for training purposes, and others approved by the Assistant Director of Case Management and Counseling, Chief Executive Officer or Assistant Vice or Vice President of Programs.
b) With the exception of the YFT Case Managers, Program Directors, Therapists, and Admissions staff, access to resident records will be limited to all other staff members on a need-to-know basis.
c) Individuals not representing YFT staff, a resident or former resident?s legal guardian, and representatives of the Virginia Department of Behavioral Health and Development Services, Division of Licensing, and other state agencies such as placing agency representatives, authorized consultants, and other persons, will only be allowed access for current and former resident files after presenting a written release from the proper authorities.
d) Staff, interns, and volunteers performing program duties are required to read and sign a confidentiality statement prior to performing duties at YFT.
3. Confidentiality of Resident Records.  The following procedures will be followed to protect the confidentiality of records:
a) Access - Residents' written records will be kept in metal filing cabinets in a secure area off limits to residents and other unauthorized personnel. Access to resident records will be limited to staff members on a need-to-know basis, licensing representatives, authorized consultants, and other persons presenting a written release from the proper authority.
b) Duplication ? Original documents will be maintained in the resident permanent record.  These documents may be duplicated for court, funding reviews, or at the request of the legal guardian.  Any material copied from a resident's record is to be treated in the same manner as the original document from which the copy is made.
c) Dissemination of any portion of records (including information received from 3rd party) ? The permanent resident record will not be released in duplication to anyone without a subpoena from a court and must have a judge?s signature. 
d) Acquiring information ? YFT respects the privacy and confidentiality of children being considered for placement and those who are ultimately placed.  YFT will request and seek to acquire only that information which is needed to properly assess the appropriateness for admission and to determine the child?s service needs.  This information will be acquired primarily from the guardian and/or parent(s) but when needed information cannot be secured in this manner, YFT will obtain necessary release from the guardian and will present as needed to ensure delivery of needed services.
4. Confidentiality of Counseling Journals and Personal Journals.  It is important that we respect personal writings while maintaining the safety and security of YFT?s residents.
a) Counseling Journals should only be read by a counseling staff member. 
a) If a staff has concerns about what may be in a counseling journal, he/she may ask a therapist to review the book with them. 
b) If it is a personal journal, this should be treated as private property unless there are concerns of serious health and/or safety issues and it is believed that the personal journal may provide pertinent information to that child or another, the journal may be viewed.  When feasible, staff should request permission from his/her supervisor or the on-call administrator, if not, staff should inform his/her supervisor as soon as possible. 
5. Procedures for Automated Records.
a) Automated records security and record retention procedures are under the Information Technology (IT) Security Procedures.
b) Staff are assigned unique passwords and access according to their job duties.


Standard Number: 	12VAC35-115-80 (Human Rights)Revised Date: May 25, 2017    Effective Date: October 7, 2013    Page: 1 of 1
Policy:

Under the following circumstances, a resident?s record may be released without the consent of the resident or their legally authorized representative, as outlined in 12 VAC 35-115-80.B (8) of the Human Rights Regulations.

Procedures:

1. In the case of a minor, the authorization of the custodial parent or other person authorized to consent to the minor's treatment is required, except when:
a) Section 54.1-2969 E of the Code of Virginia permits a minor to authorize the disclosure of information related to medical or health services for a sexually transmitted or contagious disease, family planning or pregnancy, and outpatient care, treatment or rehabilitation for substance use disorders, mental illness, or emotional disturbance.
b) The concurrent authorization of the minor and custodial parent to disclose inpatient substance abuse records.
c) The minor and the custodial parent authorizes the disclosure of identifying information related to the minor?s inpatient psychiatric hospitalization when the minor is 14 years of age or older and has consented to the admission. 
2. YFT staff may disclose the following identifying information without authorization or violation of the client's confidentiality, but only under the following conditions:
a) Emergencies: Information may be disclosed for the purpose of preventing injury to or death of a client or other person. 
b) YFT staff and health plan agencies: Any full- or part-time employee, consultant, agent, or contractor of YFT may access identifying information or disclose to another provider, a health plan, the department, or a CSB, information required to give services to the client or to get payment for the services.
c) Court proceedings: If the client or someone acting for him introduces any aspect of his mental condition or services as an issue before a court, administrative agency, or medical malpractice review panel, YFT may disclose any information relevant to that issue. This includes information that has been subpoenaed, if a court orders them to be produced, or if involuntary admission or certification for admission is being proposed.
d) Legal counsel: YFT will disclose information to their own legal counsel or to anyone working on behalf of their legal counsel in providing representation of YFT. 
e) Human rights committees: Upon request, YFT will disclose to the Local Human Rights Committee and State Human Rights Committee any information necessary for the conduct of their responsibilities under these regulations.
f) Others authorized or required by the commissioner, CSB, or private program director: Up request, YFT will disclose information to other persons if authorized or required for the following activities:
          (1) Licensing, human rights, or certification or accreditation reviews;
(2) Hearings, reviews, appeals, or investigations under these regulations;
(3) Evaluation of provider performance and client outcomes (see ?? 37.2-508 and 37.2-608 of the Code of Virginia);
(4) Statistical reporting;
(5) Preauthorization, utilization reviews, financial and related administrative services reviews, and audits; or
(6) Similar oversight and review activities.
a) Preadmission screening, services, and discharge planning: YFT will disclose to the department, the CSB, or to other providers information necessary to screen residents for admission or to prepare and carry out a comprehensive client services or discharge plan.
b) Protection and advocacy agency:  YFT will disclose information to the protection and advocacy agency in accordance with that agency?s legal authority under federal and state law.
c) Protection of public safety: If a client receiving services makes a specific threat to cause serious bodily injury or death to an identified or readily identifiable person and YFT staff reasonably believe that the client has the intent and the ability to carry out the threat immediately or imminently, staff may disclose those facts necessary to alleviate the potential threat.
d) Inspector General: Upon request, YFT will disclose to the Inspector General any client services records and other information relevant to the provider's delivery of services.
e) Virginia Patient Level Data System: Upon request, YFT will disclose financial and services information to Virginia Health Information as required by law.
f) Psychotherapy notes: Upon request, YFT will obtain an client?s authorization for any disclosure of psychotherapy notes, except when disclosure is made:
1) For training programs in which students, trainees, or practitioners in mental health are being taught under supervision to practice or improve their skills in group, joint, family or client counseling;
2) To defend YFT or its employees or staff against any accusation or wrongful conduct;
3) In discharge of YFT?s services, in accordance with ?54.1-2400.1 B of the Code of Virginia, to take precautions to protect third parties from violent behavior or other serious harm;
4) As required in the course of an investigation, audit, review, or proceeding regarding a provider?s conduct by a duly authorized law-enforcement, licensure, accreditation, or professional review entity; or
5) When otherwise required by law.
g)  A law enforcement official:
1) Pursuant to a search warrant or grand jury subpoena;
2) In response to their request, for the purpose of identifying or locating a suspect, fugitive, an client required to register pursuant to ?9.1-901 of the Sex Offender and Crimes Against Minors Registry Act, material witness, or missing person, provided that only the following information is disclosed:
* Name and address of the client;
* Date and place of birth of the client;
* Social Security number of the client;
* Blood type of the client;
* Date and time of treatment received by the client;
* Date and time of death of the client;
* Description of distinguishing physical characteristics of the client; and
* Type of injury sustained by the client.
3. Upon request, YFT will tell the client?s legal guardian or his/her authorized representative the sources of information contained in his services records and provide a written listing of disclosures of information made without authorization, except for disclosures:
a) To employees of the department, CSB, the provider, or other providers;
b) To carry out treatment, payment, or health care operations;
c) That are incidental or unintentional disclosures that occur as a by-product of engaging in health care communications and practices that are already permitted or required;
d) To an client or his authorized representative;
e) Pursuant to an authorization;
f) For national security or intelligence purposes;
g) To correctional institutions or law enforcement officials; or
h) That were made more than six years prior to the request.
4. If YFT is asked to disclose information to a social service or protective services agency about a client who the provider reasonably believes to be a victim of abuse or neglect, YFT is not required to inform the client or his authorized representative of the disclosure if:
a) YFT, in the exercise of professional judgment, believes that informing the client would place the client at risk of serious harm; or
b) YFT would be informing the authorized representative, and the provider reasonably believes that the authorized representative is responsible for the abuse or neglect, and that informing such person would not be in the best interests of the client.

